James Fleming was born and baptised on 1 June 1830 at Inveravon, the only son of a tenant farmer at Tomfarclas on the Ballindalloch estate. James helped his father on the farm until manhood and then embarked on a search for more financially rewarding employment, firstly as a commissioning agent and dealer in the grain trade.

In the mid-1860s Fleming acquired a lease of the Dailuaine Distillery at nearby Carron and held it for ten years, making connections in the spirit trade. By the 1871 Census he had moved to Aberlour, and in 1874 he established a new branch agency for the North of Scotland Bank. He became a prominent and respected member of the local community: as elder of the parish church, chairman of the school board, county councillor, and town provost.

In 1879 Fleming secured a feu from the Earl of Fife on the land where he would build his new Aberlour distillery and on its completion produced whisky there from December 1880. He sold the business to his acting agents, Robert Thorne & Sons, in 1892.

When James Fleming died, aged 65, he left a significant and tangible legacy. He built Aberlour's first public meeting place, the Fleming Hall, in 1889. This was followed in 1900 by the Fleming Cottage Hospital, providing isolation accommodation to limit the spread of infectious diseases.

In Recollections of a Speyside Parish (1902), James Thomson praised Fleming's generosity:

‘The hospital that has been built and endowed by [Fleming's] liberality will always remain a memorial to his Christian philanthropy. I can well remember more than one epidemic that devastated many a home in the village. Had there been at the time such an institution in the place, many lives might have been saved.’

Fleming's commitment to improving the welfare of local people is evidenced by another bequest made on 11 June 1895, two weeks before his death, safety, as well as convenience, being a key concern for the village. As his will stipulated:

‘I leave a sum of five hundred pounds for the purpose of erecting a steel wire footbridge over the river Spey at Aberlour at a place as near as possible to the mouth of the burn of Ruthrie [the Lour Burn] so as to connect the village of Charlestown with the parish of Knockando.’

On 3 December 1898 the ferry over the Spey capsized and the ferryman and another male passenger were both drowned. This tragedy intensified local demand for a safe crossing and James's widow, Margaret, lobbied James Grant, then laird of Wester Elchies (whose family had owned the ferry rights for over three centuries) for four years before he agreed to joint fund the construction of the pedestrian Victoria Bridge. This was duly completed and opened without ceremony in 1902 nearby the scene of the tragedy. In order to preserve the access rights to his Elchies estate, a condition of the agreement made by James Grant's son Charles was that the bridge should be closed to free public access for one day every year and on that day people should pay a toll of one penny to cross. This tradition continued into the 1990s, and locals still refer to the bridge as ‘The Penny Brig’.

Fittingly, James Fleming is buried in the town's cemetery almost opposite the distillery site.

--

James Fleming: Distiller

Sit down and pour yourself a dram – because we've got a story to tell. And, like any story worth sharing, it begins with a bold, daring idea. The year was 1879 and James Fleming, the son of a grain farmer in Banffshire, decided to build Aberlour Distillery from the ground up.

But Fleming was no traditionalist. He was a trailblazer, an experimenter – a pioneer of the highest, whisky-soaked order. He realised that Scotch whisky owed much of its flavour and silky texture to the nation's pure spring waters, and so he vowed to discover a way to respect his country's waterways in return. How? By harnessing the might of the Lour Burn with a grand waterwheel.

The wheel spun and the spirit came. Aberlour whisky ran both into the barrels and out into the community, and beyond; and Fleming's distillery funded a town hall, a cottage hospital – and even left £500 to finance the future building of the suspension bridge over the Spey.

When Fleming died, his mantra remained: ‘Let the deed show.’ It's a simple, humble nudge in the direction of honesty and integrity, a call to let a person's work speak for itself. And these four words still ring true more than a century since the whisky maker's death. For today, the unique brand continues to deliver on deeds.

‘Let the deed show…’

The local community continues to be supported, with the barley used to create Aberlour's whisky grown just a few miles from the distillery itself. The craft is still honoured and respected, with each spirit sleeping for at least twelve years in Spanish sherry and American oak casks to develop the flavours it deserves.

And, to mark the beginning of the salmon fishing season every February, a bottle of Aberlour is poured into the Spey to bless the waters.

Or is this done to appease the ancient water spirit that legend says demanded one human sacrifice every year? In the 1960s one distillery manager refused to continue this tradition and no whisky was offered. Two weeks later, he collapsed and died of a heart attack while fishing on the Spey near Arndilly.

A tragic coincidence, or…?

The section ‘James Fleming: Distiller’ appears courtesy of the Aberlour Distillery.
